# digital-democracy.org
Digital Democracy website

To run locally, navigate to the local folder, enter in a terminal window: jekyll serve
Then run at localhost:4000

## Setup

We recommend using rbenv to get your environment setup. 

1. [Download and install rbenv](https://github.com/rbenv/rbenv#installation) (note: you can also use RVM, but you can't have both
   installed at the same time!)
1. Open a new terminal window.
1. `git clone git@github.com:digidem/digital-democracy.org.git && cd digital-democracy`.
1. `rbenv install`
1. `gem install bundler`
1. Re-open your terminal window and go back to the `digital-democracy` directory to ensure the correct paths are created.
1. `bundler install`

Now you will be ready to start the development server!

## Running the development server 

```bash
bundler exec jekyll serve --incremental
```

bundler install

## Creating a new blog post

1. Open a blog post within the `_posts/blog` directory. Copy the contents of the file to the
   clipboard. e.g., [this blog post](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/digidem/digital-democracy.org/master/_posts/blog/2019-12-11-surveillance.md)

2. Go to the [`_posts/blog`
   directory](https://github.com/digidem/digital-democracy.org/tree/master/_posts/blog) and click "Create new file".

3. Paste the contents into the screen, and then edit the fields as you want
   them to appear. It might be best to use a markdown editor separately such as
hackmd.io/ to preview your changes and save them for editing later.

4. Type in the message like 'created new blog post', and check the option for 'Create a new
   branch for this commit' -- then click 'Commit new file'

5. You will then be able to see the preview of this file in the 'Pull Request'
   that is automatically generated by netlify.

