---
title: 'Siekopai'
image: /assets/haiti-women-cameras-phone.jpg
featured: medium
published: true
---

The Siekopai people were displaced from their ancestral territory, known as
Lagarto Cocha in the 1940s due to a border conflict between Peru and Ecuador.
This war divided their families and their culture in two for over sixty years,
with many forced upriver into Ecuador and others down into Peru. The Siekopai
in Ecuador now live a day’s travel upriver, along the Aguarico river, an area
with a very different ecosystem and hemmed in on all sides by the social and
environmental impacts of oil operations and industrial agriculture. Only in the
last couple of decades has the border region been largely demilitarised and the
Siekopai been allowed back to visit.  

This area, full of flooded forests and black water lakes is believed to be
where the Siekopai people originated, and many myths and stories are located
there. Recently they have started a project to reconnect the new generations
with their ancestral heartland, travelling back to Lagarto Cocha a few times
a year to hunt, fish, practice sacred ceremonies and collect some of the
special resources found there which are central to their culture. Part of this
project involved making a map of the river Lagarto, the many lakes which fringe
it, the sites of old villages, ceremonial sites and the paths taken by their
ancestors, and they approached Digital Democracy in 2015 to help them think
through their methodology.


**Community partners:**

Dd worked closely with the Siekopai territory team of
Alianza Ceibo, with community members working on the project, and had staff
from Amazon Frontlines. 

**Co-created solutions:**

The Dd team trained a group of ten young Siekopai to use
Mapeo to trace the outlines of the many lakes, using an offline satellite image
as a guide, which they could do in their villages with community members
looking on. They then visited the area with their elders and recorded the names
and stories of each lake and important place. This map was added to with GPS
points taken at the sites of old villages, which they identified through oral
histories, and ancestral paths connecting river basins and villages. 

**Impact:**

The use of technology has given the young people involved a concrete
role in this process of reconnection, helping them engage with and make theirs
an area they had only ever heard about in stories from their grandparents. The
process was accompanied by the territory and communications teams of Alianza
Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines, who supported them to make videos explaining the
history behind each site. Digital Democracy worked with these teams to produce
an interactive map, in Siekopai, Spanish and English, on which Lagarto Cocha,
and their stories and testimonies can be explored. 

**Learn more:**

 * [Luke story on AF site](https://www.amazonfrontlines.org/chronicles/lagarto-cocha/)
 * [Alianza Ceibo ](http://www.alianzaceibo.org/alianza/siekopai/)
 * Hernan drawing video

------

**Siekopai**

The Siekopai people of Ecuador approached Digital Democracy in 2016 to help
them think through the best way of mapping the lakes and historical sites of
their ancestral territory, Lagarto Cocha. This area, full of flooded forests
and black water lakes is the centre of their origin story, and was their home
until the 1940s, when a border conflict between Peru and Ecuador forced them to
relocate up river in Peru, and downriver in Ecuador. The war effectively
divided their families and their culture in two for over sixty years until, in
the last couple of decades, the area has been largely demilitarised and they
have been allowed to visit.

The river Lagarto, which forms the Peru-Ecuador border, lies within national
parks in both countries, and other indigenous people have settled closeby. The
Siekopai in Ecuador now live a day’s travel upriver, along the Aguarico river,
an area with a very different ecosystem and hemmed in on all sides by the
social and environmental impacts of oil operations and industrial agriculture. 

They have begun a project to reconnect the new generations with their ancestral
heartland, travelling back to Lagarto Cocha a few times a year to hunt, fish,
practice sacred ceremonies and collect some of the special resources found
there which are central to their culture. Part of this project involved making
a map of the river Lagarto, the many lakes which fringe it, the sites of old
villages, ceremonial sites and the paths taken by their ancestors. 

Our team trained a group of ten young Siekopai to use Mapeo Desktop to trace
the outlines of the many lakes, using satellite images as a guide. They then
visited the area with their elders, a couple of whom were born there, and they
recorded the names and stories of each place. This map was added to with GPS
points taken of the sites of old villages, which they identified through oral
histories, and ancestral paths connecting river basins and villages. 

The project has allowed young Siekopai to engage with and make theirs an area
they had only ever heard about in stories from their grandparents, and the use
of technology has given them a concrete role in this process of reconnection.
The process was accompanied by the the territory and communications teams of
Alianza Ceibo and Amazon Frontlines, who supported them to make videos
explaining the history behind each site. Digital Democracy worked with these
teams to produce an interactive map, in Siekopai, Spanish and English, on which
Lagarto Cocha, and their stories and testimonies can be explored. 


