---
layout: job
title: Product Manager
published: true
slug: product-manager
excerpt: "We're looking for a Product Manager with 3+ years experience to join our remote team part time, on a 6-month contract (with potential long-term) starting as soon as possible."
---
Digital Democracy is looking for a Product Manager with 3+ years
experience to join our remote team part time, on a 6-month contract
(with potential long-term) starting as soon as possible. You will help
build cutting-edge open-source mobile and desktop mapping apps for
remote and marginalized communities to document, map, monitor, manage
and report information on environmental and human rights issues around
the world.

We've seen firsthand that **change does not come from technology, but
from how people use it**. We are building tools our partners are using
to achieve transformative change. We are dedicated to working towards a
world where all people can participate in the decisions that govern
their lives.

What we're looking for
----------------------

You will manage the releases and development of two open-source apps:
Mapeo Desktop and Mapeo Mobile. You will work closely with the design,
program and tech teams to prioritize product requirements and manage
development to meet release deadlines. You will synthesize user needs
and internal expertise to develop clear product requirements and work
with the tech team to turn those into technical tasks and manage their
completion. You will own and maintain the product roadmap. You will help
budget resources for product features and grow the tech team as needed.
You will work closely with the Technical Director, who is responsible
for long-term product direction and technical strategies.

We are a small, high-impact team that takes a collaborative approach to
tool-building and decision-making. Our tool development is led by our
partner communities. You would be building tools that will be tested and
used by our partners to confront real problems on the ground in the
Amazon and around the world: Protection of the world's forests and their
ancestral homelands from deforestation and contamination. We need
someone who can think creatively and collaboratively to solve these
problems.

This is a part-time position of 20--30 hours per week (negotiable
depending on experience and domain knowledge) with the possibility to
grow into a full-time position dependent on new funding opportunities.

The Role
--------

- Work closely with design, program, and tech teams to define product
   requirements

- Manage releases, bug fixes and launch of new features

- Own and maintain the product roadmap

- Communicate progress to end-users and internal stakeholders

- Budget time and resources for technical tasks

- Ensure that deadlines for funder commitments and user needs are met

- You're comfortable working with a small team and jumping in to help
   where needed

Qualities we're on the lookout for
----------------------------------

- **Organization**. You have experience managing a complex mobile
   and/or desktop application and know when to reduce scope to meet
   deadlines.

- **Planning**. You have experience working with developers to
   realistically estimate time and capacity.

- **Communication**. You work well with designers, developers and
   user-researchers.

- **Design-thinking**. Our development is led by human-centered design
   in collaboration with the communities that we work with on the
   ground.

- **Values-based**. You share our belief in building tools that
   prioritize the self-determination and autonomy of our partners,
   and challenge legacies of colonization and extraction.

- **Self-directed**. You are comfortable with managing your own
   priorities and tasks in coordination with a small, remote team.

Our Team
--------

Our small but growing team is based in Oakland, CA; Washington, DC; New
York; Ottawa & Montreal, Canada; Abuja, Nigeria; Catalonia, Spain;
London & Oxford, U.K. and we welcome candidates from around the world,
especially South America. We embrace distributed working, and are happy
for you to work from where you live. The Indigenous communities we work
with have lived through colonization and deal with its effects everyday,
along with marginalization and discrimination against their language and
culture. It is therefore particularly important that we build a diverse
team with individuals who understand and empathize with their situation.
Indigenous people, people of color, women, LGBTQ folk and others who
identify as coming from a marginalized identity are strongly urged to
apply. We are an equal opportunity employer and value diversity. We do
not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin,
gender, sexual orientation, age, marital status, veteran status, or
disability status.

Perks
-----

- **Flexible schedule, location and hours**. As an organization we
   embrace working smarter, not harder. We are happy for you to work
   from where you live, on a schedule that works for you.

- Opportunity to **visit our partners in the field**. Although most of
    the job is desk based, this role may include travel to our partner
    communities for workshops if you continue working with us
    long-term beyond the current pandemic.

- Opportunity to **play a key role at a ground-breaking
   organization**. You have the opportunity to make a big impact in a
   small team.

- **Compensation and benefits commensurate with experience** (our
   current range is \$6,000--8,000 USD per month full-time
   equivalent), with flexible hours and opportunity to work where and
   when best fits your schedule.

How to Apply
------------

Send a note with the following to
[jobs+pm@digital-democracy.org](mailto:jobs+pm@digital-democracy.org).
We will review applications as we receive them.

- Why you're interested in joining the Digital Democracy team.

- *Résumé* / CV

- (Extra points) a story of an experience in work, travel or
   volunteering that has changed your perception of the world.
