---
categories: 
  - projects
layout: project
title: Forest Change Monitoring in Guyana
image: "http://farm4.staticflickr.com/3669/9909672286_594d3d9d12_o.jpg"
featured: medium
permalink: /ourwork/guyana
published: true
---

## Monitoring Forest Change in Guyana

Imagine a vast territory of savannah, north of the Amazon river basin. An area of 6 million sparsely populated acres, where illegal logging and mining persists because the land is so far from any watchful eyes or enforcement.

This area is where the Wapichana people of Guyana live. A local NGO has been charged with monitoring this territory to uncover and expose illegal activity in the forests. But this poses a daunting challenge - how does a small group of monitors cover six million acres?

One word: Satellites. 

We're working with community monitors in Guyana, Forest People's Program, American Academy for the Advancement of Science & a top-notch team of technologists to create an early warning platform which will combine satellite scanning with literal groundtruthing to give our partners tools to detect illegal activity as quickly as possible, allowing them to then report illegal activity to the proper authorities. Thanks to a grant from Google Earth Outreach, we're developing Wapichana Deforestation Alert System to scan satellite imagery in search of changes in forest cover, and send coordinates to the team members on the ground. We're excited about this project both for the potential it has to better protect the savanah rainforest and because it combines both high-tech (satellites) and the critical on-the-ground work of local communities. In fall 2013 we are testing the initial platform as well as conducting in-person trainings with communities in Guyana. 