---
categories: blog
published: false
title: Honoring the life of Dan Fredinburg
author: Emily Jacobi
image: /assets/Dan on pagoda.jpg
---

“I think it was different with every mountain, for different reasons. This one, I’m not planning for what’s on the other side.” - Dan Fredinburg

Four weeks ago, Digital Democracy lost a close collaborator, ally and supporter. Four weeks ago, I lost a dear friend. 

Dan Fredinburg, an adventurer, mountain climber and passionate social change-maker was at Mount Everest basecamp with colleagues from Google on April 25, when a devastating  7.8 magnitude earthquake struck Nepal. The earthquake set off an avalanche on Everest, fatally killing Dan & xx others. The death toll throughout Nepal has been much greater still. Two large earthquakes - and their subsequent aftershocks - have forever transformed the physical, psychic and social landscape in Nepal, and there is important and urgent work being done - particularly by affected communities themselves (LINK?) to respond. 

Within the much bigger story of loss and resilience in Nepal, I want to share the individual, and particular story of Dan Fredinburg, a man who at only 33 years had lived a most glorious and full life, and who greatly influenced me and Digital Democracy’s work. At first glance it might appear to be the story of a life lost because of the earthquake. But I think Dan’s story is about much more than that - it’s the story of impact that lasts long after we are gone, an embodiment of the truth that how we choose to live our lives affects people far beyond ourselves. 

“Dan is the most outrageous person I’ve ever met.” - Alex Abelin, May 9 2015

Dan Fredinburg: Adventurer, athlete, a brilliant mind and skillful engineer. He was man who held many titles, roles and positions, who was constantly starting new businesses and projects, yet also managed to maintain an impressive day job as director of privacy for GoogleX. Filled with  seemingly boundless energy, he had an ability to draw people around him and convince them to join him on wild and wacky adventures. Full of infectious love for life, he was the life of the party, but he had equal enthusiasm for tackling social and environmental problems, and a knack for connecting adventures with social causes. Quick-witted and sharply analytical, you could call him a problem solver, but he didn’t just solve problems that emerged in the day-to-day workplace - he quested in search of the big problems, the ones that most people prefer not to touch. He approached those problems head on, with his characteristic determination, and he refused to believe they were insurmountable challenges. Like the mountains he climbed, he was always in search of the next peak, the next challenge. Along the way, he raised awareness and money for the causes he cared about, measurably improving the lives of people all around the world.

“He always wanted to help people, but he wanted to figure out how to do more of it, faster.” - Andrew Swerdlow, May 9 2015

The Digital Democracy team was first introduced to Dan through a then-fellow Googler, Alex Abelin. In July 2012, Dan and a crew of friends were preparing to summit Mount Kilimanjaro, and they wanted to connect it to a cause - in this case, raising money to support Digital Democracy’s mission to empower marginalized communities to use technology to defend their rights. Dan & others worked closely with Dd team member Biz Ghormley to design a crowd-funding campaign that raised XX for Dd. In true Dan Fredinburg style, he carried a dinosaur costume all the way to the top of Africa’s highest peak, where the crew filmed themselves dancing in their moment of victory  (link to video of the top). The following year, Dd advisor Rebecca Joy Norlander and another group also climbed Kili to raise funds for Dd, inspired by Dan and his crew. 

In retrospect, it’s quite fitting that Dd began collaborating with Dan in 2012. We were just growing into our own as an organization, really figuring out our sweet spot both in our programs and our broader vision for a world where grassroots groups living on the frontlines of environmental and human rights threats have more agency to directly address the decisions affecting their lives. That year we were seeing major changes and breakthroughs in our projects and community partners in Haiti and Burma/Myanmar, and it had become clear to me as Executive Director that Digital Democracy’s work isn’t just about the specifics of our projects, it is also about the bigger possibilities they revealed, things that had previously seemed impossible. “Things are only impossible until they are not” became one of my mantras. Although we came at the work from different angles and expertise, in Dan I found a kindred spirit, someone relentlessly committed to making impossible things possible, someone unwilling to resign himself to the idea that the status quo is as good as it gets. 

That fall, I was invited to return to Burma/Myanmar in early 2013, to give the opening address at BarCamp Yangon, a technology conference Dd’s cofounder Mark Belinsky and I helped start in 2009. BarCamp Yangon was one of those ideas that seemed impossible - until, despite the odds, the organizers pulled it off - not only hosting a technology conference in what was at the time one of the world’s strictest authoritarian regimes, but breaking world records while doing so. The local organizers had turned the conference into a success story, and even had the Burmese opposition leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi give the opening address in 2012, after she had been released from decades of house arrest. So in fall 2012, they invited Digital Democracy to return to Yangon for BarCamp 2013, and encouraged me to bring technologists who could help connect Myanmar’s burgeoning technology scene to global innovators. Dan and his colleague Andrew Swerdlow were the first people I asked, and they invited a third colleague from Google, Brian Kemler, who had traveled to Myanmar before and had studied the country’s complex politics and history. And so in late 2012 the four of us began preparing for a trip to Myanmar for a truly historic moment. US sanctions were just beginning to be dismantled thanks to democratic reforms taking place in the country, and, while not officially representing Google at the conference, Dan, Andrew and Brian were the vanguard of a process of opening up to the larger world. A few months after our visit and attendance at BarCamp Yangon, our friend and one of our primary contacts in Yangon, Thaung Su Nyein, introduced Google CEO (what’s his name?)  on his first official visit to Myanmar. Tech access and connections with the outside world increased rapidly in 2013; we were there for the beginning of it. 

BarCamp 2013 boasted xxx participants, and it was a whirlwind for us. The four of us helped organize and lead multiple sessions - one of my favorite moments was a packed auditorium of young people to attend a session Dan & Andrew led on entrepreneurship, sharing expertise not only from Google but also Seamless Planet, an ethical tourism company they founded to support local tour operators. We all recognized that Myanmar was undergoing massive changes, and Dan was particularly passionate that local people - young men and women who were teaching themselves to code, who had a vision for the future of their country - should be empowered to do that through entrepreneurship and other avenues. We had another plan, too - to collect imagery for Google Streetview. We added an extra day in Yangon after BarCamp, and Dan, Andrew and I led a one-day photography and mapping workshop, working with Thaung Su Nyein to acquire android phones to collect the imagery. The google app store wasn’t legally accessible in Myanmar yet, which just made it an extra challenging technical puzzle for us to take on. But Dan is the type of person who thrives on technical challenges, and it just seemed to energize him further. His charisma charmed all the participants of the workshop, and he and Andrew were beloved by them all by the end of the day. That evening, we set off on the next leg of our adventure - to see some of Myanmar’s most famous sites, collecting Google Streetview images along the way.

insert Thaung Su Nyein

Sunrise on Inle Lake. Traditional fisherman in wooden boats. The sunset pagoda at Bagan. These iconic sites Dan visited like a whirlwind. He and Andrew went to Inle Lake then met me at Bagan. Some of my sweetest memories of the trip were from our time exploring the UNESCO world heritage site of Bagan, a stunning landscape of stupas, temples and pagodas built by the Burmese kings between the 12th and 14th centuries. 

 traveling around the country - inle lake; bagan


The trip ended, and we all went on to other adventures. At the end of the trip, I gifted Dan my copy of the Tao Te Ching, a book whose philosophy we explored in the many hours of travel we shared. Dan’s passion for mountain climbing was taking off, and as I focused on the next phase of Digital Democracy’s work in the Amazon, Dan was training, starting new initiatives, and, in spring 2014, attempting his first ascent of Mount Everest. This was a new level of challenge, even for Dan, and he approached it with grace, dedication and his characteristic humor. His friends across the globe followed on Instagram; I was always struck by his magical combination of dedication 

“quote about the difference with the last everest summit” - Dan Fredinburg

- mountain climber + dedication to social causes 
     - laundry
     - save the ice

seamless planet

“In the end, death comes for all of us. In that case, the true tragedy is not to die, but to die without ever having truly lived."

Four weeks ago, a devastating earthquake hit Nepal. Four weeks ago an avalanche hit Mount Everest and killed my friend, Dan Fredinburg. Two weeks ago, we gathered at a memorial service to celebrate Dan’s life. We shared our Dan stories, we laughed, we celebrated, we participated in a beautiful puja ceremony like the one Dan participated on his ascent to Everest six weeks ago. Many people captured what I was feeling in my heart: That Dan’s body died on Mt Everest, but Dan’s spirit lives on - in my heart, in the heart of all who knew him, and many more who he has inspired despite never meeting them in person. 

Dan’s commitment to making the world a better place - from supporting orphanages in Nepal to tackling the biggest issue of our era - climate change - also lives on, through Seamless Planet, the Laundry, and the Dan Fredinburg Foundation. And it lives on in Digital Democracy’s work, in our commitment to a mission that Dan believed in - to use technology in a way that empowers, that democratizes, that lifts up people’s spirits and inspires them to do more, live more boldly, and to take care of one another. Just as traveling with Dan to Myanmar helped inspire us to host a Hackathon in the Peruvian Rainforest, Dan’s life will continue to inspire us in our work, and inspire me, personally, to live courageously. We’re planning future adventures in Dan’s honor, and we invite you, too, to be inspired by Dan’s legacy as you contemplate what (in the words of Mary Oliver) you are willing to do with your one precious life.

Four weeks ago, Dan Fredinburg died on Mt Everest, but his spirit lives on. Today, I encourage you to take a moment to honor Dan’s life, support the Dan Fredinburg Foundation, and, most importantly, #LiveDan - what is the mountain you are willing to climb? What actions are your willing to take to truly live your life?
